# Scripts

Inputs needed:  
* List of "test" genbank IDs in .txt file, one ID per line
* List of reference genbank IDs that contain all plastid genes in .txt file, one ID per line
The rest of the files needed will be generated by the scripts below.  
  
    
Python Modules needed:
* SeqIO (from Bio)
* Seq (from Bio.Seq)
* SeqRecord (from Bio)
* argparse
* os
* time
* subprocess
* certifi
* Entrez (from Bio)
* numpy
* Path (from pathlib)


## fetchGenbank.py
This script takes an input of a list of genbank IDs in a text file and makes an output file of one big genbank file. At the moment that big genbank file goes into the `Outputs` directory within `Scripts`.  
The file name of the output file has to be given as an argument on the command line. An email address associated with an account on genbank/NCBI must also be given to run the script.  
The `Outputs` directory is created automatically by the script and does not need to be written into the path in the `--output` flag

## presenceAbsence.py
This script converts the annotations present in genbank files to a TSV with a column for each gene and a row for each taxon.  
It takes the big genbank file output by `fetchGenbank.py` as input. The .gbk file must be specified on the command line as input.  
The value entered in the output TSV represents the status of the gene in that organism (0 = present, 1 = missing, 2 = pseudogene).   
The name of the output .TSV must be specified on the command line.    
A .txt file that gives presence/absence data in the correct format for inserting into a nexus file for character state mapping in e.g. Mesquite can be produced.    
A default gene list is provided in the script, but an input of chosen plastid genes can be used. The genes should be written in a .txt file with one gene per line.   
By default, all genes annotated as present have their full gene sequences removed and put into multifasta files by gene.   
There is the option to produce multifastas by gene for coding sequences/intron free sequences as well.    

## heatMapPlot.py
This script takes the output .TSV from `presenceAbsence.py` as input and makes a "heatmap" plot showing gene status for each taxon as a .png file.   
The output file name can be given on the command line or the file will automatically called `heatmapPlot.png`.    
This plot relies solely on the presence/absence data from the .TSV file, which can be manually edited.    

## blastPresenceAbsence.py
This script uses the .TSV generated from `presenceAbsence.py` and a list of genbank IDs to use as plastid gene reference sequences input by the user. 
The presence/absence profiles from the TSV are read in by gene for each species. Species from this TSV that have all genes present will be added to the reference species list.  
The reference species list should ideally contain genbank IDs of whole plastid sequences of species closely to the taxa of interest that contain all plastid genes of interest. An example list is provided (`referenceIDsList.txt`).  
For each species in the TSV, blast searches are performed on genes that are categorised as either missing or pseudogenized. The blast searches are done with a reference sequence from the user's input reference species list.  
The script outputs a directory `Blast` with four subdirectories; `Databases`, `PlastidSequences`, `ReferenceGeneSequences`, `ReferenceGenomes`, and `Results`.  
* `Databases` database files for every genbank accession with missing genes or pseudogenes that are needed for blast
* `PlastidSequences` fasta files for every genbank accession with missing or pseudogenes
* `ReferenceGeneSequences` A fasta file for every gene of interest created from the first reference sequence
* `ReferenceGenomes` Genbank files for all reference sequences (including those added after checking presence/absence profiles)
* `Results` Text files from the output of each blast search performed to look for missing or pseudo genes using a reference sequence

## blastProcessing.py
This script uses the blast results generated from `blastPresenceAbsence.py` to generate multifasta files for all of the genes tested.  
The multifasta files for each gene contain sequences from the reference plastid sequences as outlined in `blastPresenceAbsence.py` and sequences from the test plastid genomes that were identified as having high similarity to the gene with blast searches.  
The sequences in the multifasta file from the test plastid genomes are labelled with the sequence coordinates and the reference sequence that was used to find that specific hit.  
Test plastid - gene combinations that had no hits found with blast are output to `NoHitsFiles.txt`.  
Exceptionally long blast hits are are not written out to the multifasta files, but the .txt blast result file is flagged and written to `filesToCheckAgain.txt`.  
Inputs are directories containing blast results, reference gene sequences, and test plastid fasta files.   
All of the above directories are generated inside `Blast` by `blastPresenceAbsence.py` automatically and these directories are set as defaults in the script.  
An output directory name can be specified, or the multifasta files and .txt flagging files will be put in a directory called `unalignedMultifastas`.  
The threshold for how long a blast hit has to be to be flagged can be adjusted with `--ir-cutoff` but the default is 5000.  
The number of base pairs flanking the blast hit to be included in the final multifasta file can be specified hit with `--flanking-region`, but the default is set to 0.  
  
## aligner.py
This script aligns the files in `unalignedMultifastas`output by `blastProcessing.py`.  
Requires MAFFT to be installed into the user's PATH or able to be called on the command line.  
The directory containing the multifastas to be aligned needs to be specified in `--input`.  
The aligned fasta files will be output into a new directory specified by the user with `--output`.  
This is the least worked on so far!!!!  


## updateTSV.py  
This script uses the alignments created in `aligner.py` and the presence/absence .TSV file produced by `presenceAbsence.py`.    
Determines if any changes need to be made to the presence/absence .TSV based on the blast results.   
Creates a new presence/absence .TSV file and a change log .TSV that records changes made to the original presence/absence .TSV file and why.  
The new output presence/absence .TSV can also be used with `heatMapPlot.py` to make a new figure.   
  
  
### To do list
* fix flagging/ strangeness around IR in `blastProcessing.py`
* make a list of all modules needed for pipeline
* deal with genes that have introns (exonerate???)
* improve `aligner.py` (only once `blastProcessing.py` is fixed)

